Welcome to Anaesthesia Compendium. Today's viva station:
anticholinesterases and the reversal of neuromuscular block.
I shall take the candidate through it, question by question. Let us begin.
Let us discuss the reversal of neuromuscular block.
What is the underlying principle?
The aim of reversal is to restore normal neuromuscular transmission at the end of
surgery, ensuring full recovery of muscle strength before the patient is woken and
extubated, so as to avoid the dangers of residual block.
There are two distinct strategies.
The traditional approach uses the anticholinesterase drugs,
which inhibit the enzyme acetylcholinesterase at the neuromuscular junction,
increasing the local concentration of acetylcholine so that it competes more
effectively with the non-depolarising blocker for the receptor,
shifting the balance back towards transmission — an indirect, competitive reversal.
The newer approach, applicable to the aminosteroid agents, uses sugammadex,
which directly binds and removes the blocker from the plasma.
So the principle is either to raise acetylcholine to outcompete the blocker,
or to chemically remove the blocker itself,
and these two mechanisms underlie modern reversal.
Name the anticholinesterases and describe how neostigmine works.
The anticholinesterases used in anaesthesia and related practice are neostigmine,
the agent for reversing neuromuscular block; edrophonium, a short-acting agent;
pyridostigmine, used in myasthenia gravis; and physostigmine,
which crosses the blood-brain barrier.
Neostigmine is a quaternary ammonium compound that inhibits acetylcholinesterase at
the neuromuscular junction, preventing the breakdown of acetylcholine and so
increasing its concentration in the synaptic cleft;
the raised acetylcholine competes with the non-depolarising blocker at the receptor
and restores transmission.
Its action has a ceiling, because once the enzyme is maximally inhibited no further
acetylcholine accumulation is possible,
so neostigmine cannot reverse a very deep block.
Being a charged quaternary compound, it does not cross the blood-brain barrier.
So neostigmine reverses block indirectly by raising junctional acetylcholine,
with a ceiling to its effect.
Why must an antimuscarinic be given with neostigmine?
Because the acetylcholine that neostigmine causes to accumulate acts not only at
the nicotinic receptors of the neuromuscular junction but also at muscarinic
receptors throughout the body, producing unwanted parasympathetic effects:
bradycardia and the risk of asystole, increased salivary and bronchial secretions,
bronchoconstriction, increased gut motility with nausea, and miosis.
To prevent these, an antimuscarinic drug is given with the neostigmine —
glycopyrronium, also called glycopyrrolate, or atropine.
Glycopyrronium is commonly chosen because its onset and duration match neostigmine
well and, being a quaternary compound,
it does not cross the blood-brain barrier or cause central effects,
whereas atropine has a faster onset and crosses into the brain.
The antimuscarinic is given to block the muscarinic effects while leaving the
nicotinic reversal at the neuromuscular junction unopposed.
So neostigmine and glycopyrronium are given together to reverse block safely.
What determines whether neostigmine can be used, and the timing of reversal?
Neostigmine can only reverse a block that has already begun to recover
spontaneously, because of its ceiling effect:
there must be some return of neuromuscular function — conventionally at least two,
and preferably more, twitches of the train-of-four present — before neostigmine is
given, since it cannot reverse a deep block with few or no twitches.
If given into a deep block it will be inadequate, and recovery will be incomplete.
After administration, full reversal takes several minutes,
and recovery must be confirmed by quantitative monitoring to a train-of-four ratio
of at least ninety per cent before extubation.
If the block is too deep to reverse with neostigmine,
one must either wait for further spontaneous recovery or,
for an aminosteroid blocker, use sugammadex.
So the timing is governed by the depth of block,
neostigmine requiring established spontaneous recovery to work.
Now sugammadex. Describe its structure and mechanism.
Sugammadex is a modified gamma-cyclodextrin,
a ring-shaped molecule with a lipophilic central cavity and a hydrophilic exterior,
designed specifically to encapsulate the aminosteroid neuromuscular blockers.
It works by a wholly different mechanism from the anticholinesterases:
it binds the steroidal blocker, principally rocuronium and also vecuronium,
with high affinity, enclosing it within its cavity to form a tight,
inactive complex in the plasma.
This removes free blocker from the plasma,
creating a concentration gradient that draws the blocker away from the
neuromuscular junction back into the plasma, where it too is bound,
rapidly terminating the block.
The sugammadex-blocker complex is then excreted unchanged by the kidney.
Because it removes the blocker directly rather than relying on raising
acetylcholine, it has no ceiling and can reverse even profound block,
and it has no muscarinic effects, so no antimuscarinic is needed.
What are the advantages of sugammadex over neostigmine?
Sugammadex has several advantages. It reverses block far more rapidly and
completely, restoring full strength within a few minutes.
It can reverse profound, deep block, which neostigmine cannot,
because it has no ceiling — so a rocuronium block can be reversed at any depth,
which underlies the rocuronium-and-sugammadex strategy for rapid-sequence
induction, allowing a failed intubation to be reversed promptly.
It causes none of the muscarinic side-effects,
so no antimuscarinic is required and there is no bradycardia or increased
secretions of the neostigmine type. It produces more reliable, complete reversal,
reducing residual block.
Its limitations are that it works only on the aminosteroids,
not the benzylisoquinoliniums; its cost; the rare risk of anaphylaxis;
the need for renal excretion of the complex; and certain drug interactions.
So it offers faster, deeper, cleaner reversal,
at greater cost and only for the steroidal agents.
How is sugammadex dosed, and what are its interactions and cautions?
Sugammadex is dosed according to the depth of block measured by neuromuscular
monitoring: a moderate dose for reversal at moderate block,
when the train-of-four has reappeared; a higher dose for deep block,
guided by the post-tetanic count; and a still higher dose for immediate reversal of
a profound rapid-sequence dose of rocuronium.
The complex is renally excreted, so caution is needed in severe renal impairment.
Its interactions arise from its encapsulating action:
it can bind other steroidal molecules,
notably reducing the efficacy of hormonal contraceptives,
so a patient must be advised that it is equivalent to a missed dose and to use
additional contraception; and it may interact with toremifene and certain other
drugs.
Recurarisation can occur if the dose is inadequate for the depth of block.
Anaphylaxis, though rare, is recognised. So dosing is by depth of block,
with attention to renal function, the contraceptive interaction and the small
anaphylaxis risk.
Tell me about edrophonium and physostigmine.
Edrophonium is a short-acting anticholinesterase with a rapid onset and brief
duration, which binds the enzyme reversibly and weakly;
it has been used for reversal and, classically,
in the diagnosis of myasthenia gravis as the edrophonium or Tensilon test,
in which a transient improvement in strength supports the diagnosis,
though this has largely been superseded.
Physostigmine differs from the others in being a tertiary amine that crosses the
blood-brain barrier, so it has central effects;
it is used to treat the central anticholinergic syndrome caused by antimuscarinic
drugs, reversing the central confusion and agitation,
and historically in certain poisonings.
So edrophonium is the fast, short-acting agent associated with the myasthenia test,
and physostigmine the centrally active anticholinesterase used for central
anticholinergic toxicity, in contrast to the quaternary neostigmine,
which acts only peripherally.
Compare neostigmine and sugammadex as reversal strategies.
Neostigmine is inexpensive and reverses both classes of non-depolarising blocker,
but it works indirectly, has a ceiling so cannot reverse deep block,
requires established spontaneous recovery, is relatively slow,
and needs co-administration of an antimuscarinic with its attendant effects,
and reversal may be incomplete.
Sugammadex reverses rapidly and completely, at any depth,
without muscarinic effects or an antimuscarinic,
and enables prompt reversal of rapid-sequence rocuronium,
but it works only on the aminosteroids, is costly, depends on renal excretion,
carries a small anaphylaxis risk and interacts with hormonal contraceptives.
In practice I would use sugammadex where rapid or deep reversal is needed,
for the aminosteroid agents, and where neostigmine would be inadequate or its
muscarinic effects undesirable, and neostigmine for routine reversal of an
adequately recovered block, particularly of a benzylisoquinolinium,
balancing efficacy against cost.
So the choice depends on the agent, the depth and urgency, and cost.
Why does reliable reversal and monitoring matter so much?
Because residual neuromuscular block is common, dangerous and frequently undetected.
Even a modest residual block, a train-of-four ratio below ninety per cent,
weakens the pharyngeal and upper-airway muscles and blunts the hypoxic ventilatory
response, causing airway obstruction,
impaired swallowing with a risk of aspiration,
hypoxaemia and postoperative respiratory complications,
and clinical assessment and visual or tactile judgement of a nerve stimulator
reliably miss it.
Reliable reversal — choosing an effective agent and dose for the depth of block —
together with quantitative neuromuscular monitoring to confirm a train-of-four
ratio of at least ninety per cent before extubation, is what prevents this.
The availability of sugammadex, which gives complete reversal of the aminosteroids,
and the wider adoption of quantitative monitoring,
have both improved the prevention of residual block.
So monitoring and reliable reversal together are essential to safe emergence.
Pull it together: how do you approach reversal at the end of a case?
Throughout the case I would monitor the block quantitatively.
At the end, I would assess the depth of block and choose the reversal strategy
accordingly.
For an aminosteroid blocker, especially where reversal must be rapid or the block
is deep, I would use sugammadex at the dose appropriate to the depth measured by
the train-of-four or post-tetanic count,
advising the patient about the contraceptive interaction and being mindful of renal
function and the small anaphylaxis risk.
For routine reversal of an adequately recovered block,
particularly a benzylisoquinolinium, I would use neostigmine with glycopyrronium,
but only once spontaneous recovery has begun,
with at least two train-of-four twitches present,
since neostigmine cannot reverse deep block.
In every case I would confirm full recovery to a train-of-four ratio of at least
ninety per cent by quantitative monitoring before extubation,
to prevent residual paralysis. So I would match the agent to the block and confirm
complete recovery objectively.
Describe acetylcholinesterase and where the anticholinesterases act.
Acetylcholinesterase is the enzyme that rapidly hydrolyses acetylcholine in the
synaptic cleft, terminating its action;
at the neuromuscular junction it is concentrated in the folds of the end-plate and
ensures that each nerve impulse produces a brief, discrete release of acetylcholine.
The anticholinesterases inhibit this enzyme,
so that released acetylcholine is not broken down and its concentration in the
cleft rises and its action is prolonged.
In the context of reversing a non-depolarising block,
the raised acetylcholine competes more effectively with the blocker at the
receptor, restoring transmission.
The same enzyme inhibition, however,
raises acetylcholine at all cholinergic synapses,
producing the muscarinic effects that must be countered.
So the anticholinesterases act by preventing the breakdown of acetylcholine,
raising its concentration at the junction and elsewhere.
Give the dose, onset and duration of neostigmine for reversal.
Neostigmine for reversal of neuromuscular block is given intravenously at a dose of
around fifty micrograms per kilogram,
up to a usual maximum of around five milligrams, together with an antimuscarinic.
Its onset is gradual, with the peak effect reached over several minutes — of the
order of seven to ten minutes — so reversal is not immediate,
and its duration of action is around an hour,
which is generally sufficient to outlast the recovering block.
Because of its ceiling effect it can only complete a reversal that is already under
way. The gradual onset means one must wait and confirm recovery by monitoring
rather than assume immediate reversal.
So neostigmine is given at about fifty micrograms per kilogram with an
antimuscarinic, acting over several minutes.
Explain the ceiling effect of neostigmine and its consequence.
Neostigmine works indirectly, by inhibiting acetylcholinesterase to raise
junctional acetylcholine; once the enzyme is maximally inhibited,
giving more neostigmine cannot raise acetylcholine further,
so its effect reaches a ceiling.
The consequence is that neostigmine cannot reverse a deep block,
where receptor occupancy by the blocker is too great to be overcome by the limited
rise in acetylcholine — there must already be some spontaneous recovery,
conventionally at least two train-of-four twitches present,
before neostigmine will work.
Giving neostigmine into a deep block produces inadequate, incomplete reversal.
If the block is too deep, one must wait for further spontaneous recovery or,
for an aminosteroid, use sugammadex, which has no ceiling.
So the ceiling effect is the central limitation of neostigmine and dictates the
timing of its use.
Why is an antimuscarinic co-administered,
and how do glycopyrronium and atropine differ?
The acetylcholine that neostigmine causes to accumulate acts at muscarinic
receptors as well as the nicotinic junction,
producing unwanted parasympathetic effects — bradycardia and the risk of asystole,
increased salivary and bronchial secretions, bronchoconstriction,
increased gut motility and nausea, and miosis.
An antimuscarinic is therefore given with neostigmine to block these effects while
leaving the nicotinic reversal intact.
Glycopyrronium is commonly chosen because its onset and duration match neostigmine
well and, being a quaternary compound,
it does not cross the blood-brain barrier or cause central effects.
Atropine has a faster onset, so it causes an initial tachycardia before the
neostigmine bradycardia, and it crosses into the brain,
occasionally causing central anticholinergic effects.
So an antimuscarinic is essential, and glycopyrronium is usually preferred for its
matched profile and lack of central effects.
What determines the timing of neostigmine reversal?
The timing is governed by the depth of block, because of the ceiling effect.
Neostigmine should be given only once spontaneous recovery has begun —
conventionally with at least two, and preferably more,
twitches of the train-of-four present — since it cannot reverse a deeper block.
If given too early, into a deep block,
reversal will be incomplete and residual paralysis may follow.
After administration, full reversal takes several minutes,
and recovery must then be confirmed by quantitative monitoring to a train-of-four
ratio of at least ninety per cent before extubation.
If the block is too deep to reverse,
one waits for further spontaneous recovery or uses sugammadex for an aminosteroid
agent. So neostigmine reversal is timed to a partially recovered block and
confirmed by monitoring.
Can neostigmine cause weakness if given when there is little or no block?
Yes — this is an important and somewhat counter-intuitive point.
If neostigmine is given when neuromuscular function has already fully recovered and
there is little or no block, the excess acetylcholine it produces can itself impair
transmission, causing a degree of depolarising-type weakness at the junction,
sometimes called a cholinergic or neostigmine-induced block.
So giving a large dose of neostigmine to a patient who does not need it is not
harmless and can paradoxically weaken them.
The practical implication is to reverse according to the measured depth of block
and not to give routine reversal regardless of monitoring;
where full recovery is already confirmed, reversal may be unnecessary.
So neostigmine is not benign in the absence of block,
which is a further argument for monitoring-guided reversal.
How is sugammadex dosed according to the depth of block?
Sugammadex is dosed by the depth of the aminosteroid block measured by
neuromuscular monitoring. For reversal at moderate block,
when the second twitch of the train-of-four has reappeared,
a dose of around two milligrams per kilogram is used.
For deep block, when there are no train-of-four twitches but a post-tetanic count
is present, a higher dose of around four milligrams per kilogram is used.
For immediate reversal of a profound block shortly after a rapid-sequence
intubating dose of rocuronium, a still higher dose of around sixteen milligrams per
kilogram is used.
So the dose is matched to the depth,
guided by the train-of-four and the post-tetanic count,
and the ability to give a high dose for immediate reversal of a profound block is
what underlies the rocuronium-sugammadex rapid-sequence strategy.
Describe the pharmacokinetics and renal handling of sugammadex.
Sugammadex binds the aminosteroid blocker to form a tight,
inactive complex in the plasma, and this complex, together with unbound sugammadex,
is eliminated essentially unchanged by the kidney through glomerular filtration.
Sugammadex is not metabolised.
Its renal elimination means that in severe renal impairment the clearance of both
sugammadex and the complex is reduced and prolonged,
so caution is advised in severe renal failure,
where the long-term fate of the complex is less certain,
though the reversal itself is still effective.
In normal renal function the complex is cleared over hours.
So sugammadex and its complex depend on renal excretion,
which is the basis of the caution in severe renal impairment,
while its action is independent of hepatic function.
Explain the interaction of sugammadex with hormonal contraceptives.
Sugammadex's encapsulating action is not perfectly specific:
it can bind other molecules with a steroidal structure,
including the progestogens and oestrogens in hormonal contraceptives.
A dose of sugammadex can therefore lower the circulating concentration of a
hormonal contraceptive enough to reduce its efficacy, equivalent to a missed dose.
The patient must accordingly be advised that, after receiving sugammadex,
she should follow the missed-dose instructions for her contraceptive and use an
additional barrier method for the following week for an oral contraceptive,
or as advised for other forms.
This counselling is an important and easily overlooked part of using sugammadex in
women of reproductive age. So the contraceptive interaction is a real,
clinically relevant consequence of sugammadex's binding,
requiring specific advice to the patient.
What is recurarisation, and when can it occur?
Recurarisation is the re-emergence of neuromuscular block after an apparently
adequate reversal, leaving the patient weak again,
with the dangers of airway obstruction and respiratory failure.
With neostigmine it can occur if the dose of relaxant was large or long-acting and
outlasts the reversal, or if reversal was given into too deep a block,
so that as the neostigmine wanes the residual block reappears.
With sugammadex, recurarisation can occur if the dose was inadequate for the depth
of block, so that not all the blocker was bound and free blocker redistributes back
to the junction.
It is prevented by giving an adequate reversal dose matched to the measured depth
and by confirming recovery by monitoring. So recurarisation is the return of block
after reversal, prevented by adequate, depth-matched dosing and confirmed recovery.
If a patient is re-paralysed soon after sugammadex, what are the options?
If neuromuscular block is needed again shortly after a rocuronium block has been
reversed with sugammadex, the situation is complicated because circulating
sugammadex will bind and inactivate a further dose of rocuronium or vecuronium,
so a normal dose may be ineffective.
The options are: to wait until the sugammadex has been cleared,
which takes time and depends on renal function;
to give a much larger dose of the aminosteroid to overcome the residual sugammadex;
or to use a non-aminosteroid relaxant,
a benzylisoquinolinium such as atracurium or cisatracurium,
which sugammadex does not bind, and which will therefore work normally.
The last is often the most practical. So re-paralysis soon after sugammadex is best
achieved with a benzylisoquinolinium agent,
or by waiting or using a large aminosteroid dose.
Tell me about edrophonium and the use of anticholinesterases in myasthenia.
Edrophonium is a short-acting anticholinesterase with a rapid onset and brief
duration, binding the enzyme reversibly and weakly.
It was used in the diagnosis of myasthenia gravis as the edrophonium, or Tensilon,
test, in which a transient improvement in muscle strength after a small intravenous
dose supported the diagnosis, though this has largely been superseded by antibody
and electrophysiological testing.
In the treatment of myasthenia gravis the longer-acting oral anticholinesterase
pyridostigmine is used to increase acetylcholine at the junction and improve
strength.
An excess of anticholinesterase in the myasthenic can itself cause weakness — a
cholinergic crisis — which must be distinguished from a myasthenic crisis of
undertreatment.
So edrophonium is the short-acting diagnostic agent and pyridostigmine the
maintenance treatment in myasthenia.
What is physostigmine used for?
Physostigmine differs from the other anticholinesterases in being a tertiary amine
that crosses the blood-brain barrier,
so it has central as well as peripheral effects.
This makes it the treatment for the central anticholinergic syndrome — the
confusion, agitation, delirium and sometimes coma caused by antimuscarinic drugs
such as atropine, hyoscine and certain antidepressants and antihistamines crossing
into the brain — which physostigmine reverses by raising central acetylcholine.
It has also been used in certain poisonings.
Its central action distinguishes it from the quaternary neostigmine and
glycopyrronium, which act only peripherally.
It is used cautiously because excess produces cholinergic effects.
So physostigmine is the centrally active anticholinesterase used to treat central
anticholinergic toxicity, in contrast to the peripherally restricted agents used
for neuromuscular reversal.
Describe organophosphate poisoning and its treatment.
Organophosphates, found in certain pesticides and nerve agents,
are irreversible inhibitors of acetylcholinesterase,
causing a massive accumulation of acetylcholine and a cholinergic crisis:
muscarinic features of salivation, lacrimation, urination, defecation,
bronchorrhoea and bronchospasm and bradycardia;
nicotinic features of fasciculation, weakness and paralysis;
and central features of confusion, seizures and coma.
The treatment is, first, atropine in large,
repeated doses to counter the life-threatening muscarinic effects,
particularly the bronchial secretions and bronchospasm; second,
an oxime such as pralidoxime, which reactivates the inhibited enzyme if given
before it is irreversibly aged; together with supportive care, airway protection,
ventilation and seizure control with benzodiazepines, and decontamination.
So organophosphate poisoning is a cholinergic crisis from irreversible
anticholinesterase action, treated with atropine, an oxime, and supportive care.
Why does reliable reversal and quantitative monitoring matter so much?
Because residual neuromuscular block is common, dangerous and frequently undetected.
Even a modest residual block, a train-of-four ratio below ninety per cent,
weakens the pharyngeal and upper-airway muscles and blunts the hypoxic ventilatory
response, causing airway obstruction,
impaired swallowing with a risk of aspiration,
hypoxaemia and postoperative respiratory complications,
and clinical signs and visual or tactile assessment of a nerve stimulator reliably
miss it.
Reliable reversal — an effective agent and dose matched to the depth of block —
together with quantitative neuromuscular monitoring confirming a train-of-four
ratio of at least ninety per cent before extubation is what prevents it.
The availability of sugammadex for complete reversal of the aminosteroids and the
wider adoption of quantitative monitoring have both improved its prevention.
So monitoring and reliable reversal together are essential to safe emergence.
When might you not give any reversal agent?
Reversal can be omitted only when full spontaneous recovery has been objectively
confirmed — a train-of-four ratio of at least ninety per cent on quantitative
monitoring — so that there is no residual block to reverse,
which may occur after a short-acting agent or a long interval since the last dose.
Even then, because clinical and visual assessment overestimate recovery,
omitting reversal is safe only with objective quantitative confirmation,
and many would still give reversal unless full recovery is certain.
Giving neostigmine into full recovery, as discussed, can itself cause weakness,
so routine reversal regardless of monitoring is not appropriate.
So reversal may be withheld only when quantitative monitoring confirms full
recovery, which is the key safeguard.
Otherwise reversal matched to the depth of block is given.
Does neostigmine reverse a suxamethonium block?
No — and this is an important distinction.
Neostigmine does not reverse a phase one depolarising block from suxamethonium;
indeed, by inhibiting both acetylcholinesterase and plasma cholinesterase,
it can prolong and deepen a suxamethonium block, because it raises acetylcholine,
adding to the depolarisation, and impairs the hydrolysis of suxamethonium.
So anticholinesterases are not used to reverse suxamethonium.
A phase two block from excessive suxamethonium,
which has non-depolarising characteristics,
may be partially reversed by an anticholinesterase,
but this is approached cautiously.
The point is that the indirect reversal by anticholinesterases applies to the
non-depolarising blockers, not to a depolarising suxamethonium block,
for which one simply waits for plasma cholinesterase to hydrolyse the drug.
So neostigmine reverses non-depolarising block, not suxamethonium.
Compare neostigmine and sugammadex as reversal strategies.
Neostigmine is inexpensive and reverses both classes of non-depolarising blocker,
but it works indirectly, has a ceiling so cannot reverse deep block,
requires established spontaneous recovery, is relatively slow,
and needs an antimuscarinic with its attendant effects,
and reversal may be incomplete.
Sugammadex reverses rapidly and completely, at any depth,
without muscarinic effects or an antimuscarinic,
and enables prompt reversal of rapid-sequence rocuronium,
but it works only on the aminosteroids, is costly, depends on renal excretion,
carries a small anaphylaxis risk and interacts with hormonal contraceptives.
In practice I would use sugammadex where rapid or deep reversal is needed,
for the aminosteroid agents, and where neostigmine would be inadequate or its
muscarinic effects undesirable, and neostigmine for routine reversal of an
adequately recovered block, particularly of a benzylisoquinolinium.
So the choice depends on the agent, the depth and urgency, and cost.
Pull it together: how do you approach reversal at the end of a case?
Throughout the case I would monitor the block quantitatively.
At the end I would assess the depth and choose the strategy accordingly.
For an aminosteroid blocker, especially where reversal must be rapid or the block
is deep, I would use sugammadex at the dose appropriate to the depth measured by
the train-of-four or post-tetanic count,
advising the patient about the contraceptive interaction and mindful of renal
function and the small anaphylaxis risk.
For routine reversal of an adequately recovered block,
particularly a benzylisoquinolinium, I would use neostigmine with glycopyrronium,
but only once spontaneous recovery has begun with at least two train-of-four
twitches, since neostigmine cannot reverse deep block.
In every case I would confirm full recovery to a train-of-four ratio of at least
ninety per cent by quantitative monitoring before extubation,
to prevent residual paralysis. So I would match the agent to the block and confirm
complete recovery objectively.
How does the dosing of sugammadex relate to body weight?
Sugammadex is dosed according to actual, total body weight,
because the dose must provide enough cyclodextrin molecules to encapsulate the
amount of aminosteroid blocker present,
which relates to the total dose given and the patient's size.
This is unlike the maintenance dosing of the non-depolarising blockers themselves,
which is by lean weight.
In the obese patient, therefore, sugammadex is dosed to total body weight at the
milligrams-per-kilogram appropriate to the depth of block,
to ensure complete reversal and avoid recurarisation from underdosing.
So sugammadex is given by actual body weight and by depth of block,
which together determine the dose needed to bind all the circulating and junctional
blocker.
What monitoring modalities are used to quantify neuromuscular function?
Subjective assessment — visual or tactile evaluation of the response to a nerve
stimulator — is unreliable for detecting residual block, so objective,
quantitative monitoring is recommended.
The available modalities measure the evoked muscle response: acceleromyography,
which measures the acceleration of the moving thumb and is the most widely used
quantitative method; electromyography,
which records the muscle action potential and is increasingly used;
and older methods such as mechanomyography, the research standard,
and kinemyography.
These give a numerical train-of-four ratio,
allowing confirmation of a ratio of at least ninety per cent before extubation.
The wider adoption of quantitative monitors,
particularly electromyography-based devices,
has improved the detection and prevention of residual block.
So quantitative monitoring, by acceleromyography or electromyography,
provides the objective train-of-four ratio that subjective assessment cannot.
Discuss the cost-effectiveness debate between neostigmine and sugammadex.
Sugammadex is considerably more expensive per dose than neostigmine with
glycopyrronium, which is the central tension.
Against its cost are set its benefits: faster and more complete reversal,
the ability to reverse deep and profound block,
the avoidance of muscarinic side-effects,
a reduction in residual block and possibly in postoperative respiratory
complications, and faster theatre turnover and recovery,
which carry their own value.
Some argue that the reduction in residual block and its complications,
and the efficiency gains, offset the drug cost,
particularly in higher-risk patients and where rapid reversal is needed;
others reserve sugammadex for specific indications — deep block, rapid reversal,
the patient in whom neostigmine is contraindicated or its muscarinic effects
undesirable — and use neostigmine routinely.
So the debate balances a clear drug-cost difference against patient-safety and
efficiency benefits, and practice varies, often using sugammadex selectively.
Are there effects of sugammadex on coagulation, and what is its anaphylaxis risk?
Sugammadex has been observed to cause a transient,
modest prolongation of the prothrombin time and activated partial thromboplastin
time for a short period after administration,
the clinical significance of which appears limited but is noted,
particularly in patients with bleeding risk or on anticoagulants.
Its main recognised serious adverse effect is anaphylaxis, which, though uncommon,
is well documented and appears dose-related,
with much of the data coming from countries where sugammadex has been used
extensively; it is managed along standard anaphylaxis lines.
These, together with the contraceptive interaction and the renal dependence,
are the principal safety considerations. So sugammadex transiently affects
coagulation tests to a minor degree and carries a small but real anaphylaxis risk,
which are part of the assessment of its use.
Does sugammadex reverse vecuronium as well as rocuronium,
and what about other agents?
Sugammadex is designed for and binds rocuronium most avidly,
and it also effectively reverses vecuronium, the other aminosteroid in common use,
though somewhat less avidly, so a slightly higher dose may be needed for an
equivalent depth.
It has minimal effect on pancuronium and essentially no useful effect on the
benzylisoquinolinium agents — atracurium,
cisatracurium and mivacurium — because they lack the steroidal structure it
encapsulates, and it does not reverse the depolarising block of suxamethonium.
So sugammadex reverses rocuronium and vecuronium,
which is why those aminosteroids are the agents paired with it,
while a benzylisoquinolinium block must be reversed by an anticholinesterase or
allowed to recover. This selectivity is a key practical limitation to remember.
So sugammadex is for the aminosteroids, principally rocuronium and also vecuronium.
How would you reverse block in a patient with severe renal failure?
In severe renal failure the choice of reversal interacts with the choice of
relaxant.
Ideally I would have used a benzylisoquinolinium such as cisatracurium,
eliminated by organ-independent Hofmann degradation, and reversed it,
once recovery had begun, with neostigmine and glycopyrronium,
both of which are still effective though their clearance is somewhat reduced.
Sugammadex is cautioned in severe renal failure because it and the
sugammadex-rocuronium complex are cleared by the kidney,
so their elimination is prolonged and the long-term fate of the complex less
certain, although the reversal itself is effective and it has been used in renal
failure with care.
So I would prefer an organ-independent relaxant reversed with neostigmine where
appropriate, and use sugammadex with caution if an aminosteroid block must be
reversed, mindful of its renal dependence. The planning starts with the choice of
relaxant.
Give a final integrated account of safe reversal practice.
Safe reversal begins during the case with quantitative neuromuscular monitoring.
At the end I would assess the depth of block and choose accordingly: sugammadex,
dosed by depth and actual body weight,
for the aminosteroids — particularly where reversal must be rapid,
the block is deep, or neostigmine would be inadequate or its muscarinic effects
undesirable — with attention to renal function,
the contraceptive interaction and the small anaphylaxis risk;
and neostigmine with glycopyrronium for routine reversal of an adequately recovered
block, particularly a benzylisoquinolinium,
given only once at least two train-of-four twitches are present,
since neostigmine cannot reverse deep block and can itself cause weakness if the
block has already resolved.
In every case I would confirm full recovery to a train-of-four ratio of at least
ninety per cent by quantitative monitoring before extubation,
to prevent the common and dangerous problem of residual block.
So I would match agent to block, respect the ceiling and timing of neostigmine,
and confirm complete recovery objectively.
Thank you. That was a clear and complete account. Let us stop there.
Before we close, here are the take-home messages.
First, Reversal restores neuromuscular transmission:
anticholinesterases (neostigmine) inhibit acetylcholinesterase to raise junctional
acetylcholine and outcompete the blocker;
sugammadex directly encapsulates and removes aminosteroid blockers.
Second, Neostigmine has a ceiling (cannot reverse deep block) and needs established
spontaneous recovery (≥2 train-of-four twitches);
it is given with an antimuscarinic (glycopyrronium or atropine) to block muscarinic
effects — bradycardia, secretions, bronchospasm.
Third, Sugammadex is a modified gamma-cyclodextrin that encapsulates
rocuronium/vecuronium, with no ceiling,
reversing even profound block rapidly and without muscarinic effects — enabling
prompt reversal of rapid-sequence rocuronium.
Fourth, Sugammadex is dosed by depth of block,
renally excreted (caution in renal failure),
reduces hormonal contraceptive efficacy, and carries a small anaphylaxis risk;
it works only on aminosteroids, not benzylisoquinoliniums.
Fifth, Residual block (TOF ratio <0.9) is common, dangerous and under-detected;
reliable reversal matched to depth plus quantitative neuromuscular monitoring
confirming TOF ratio ≥0.9 before extubation is essential to safe emergence.
Thank you. That concludes the station.